    The book Chief Left Hand by Margaret Coel offers unique views of the governor John
Evans. The people in the book who interacted with Evans were significantly effected by his
actions and attitude. The events in this book matter because the actions against the
Native Americans by the US government completely changed the Native American's lives for
the worse. The US broke a shocking amount of treaties with the native Americans which
caused their supply of food and any other options than the buffalo to be inaccessible to
them. John Evan's decisive characteristic contributed to him strategically attempting to
extinguish the Native Americans, he was also very Irrational which caused him to
eventually resort to a desperate attempt to remove the Native Americans, Power was his
final characteristic which tied together all the previous traits and allowed the public to
have support of him when he was in a position of power. 

    The trait that I noticed from Coel's writing was the decisiveness of Evans.  Utilizing
his trait of power helped him be decisive. Being in power allowed him to make quick
decisions which are a trait of being decisive. One technique Evans used was to over
exaggerate, “Evans aware of this official indifference, consistently exaggerated the
gravity of the situation on the plains, maintaining that isolated cases of theft by the
Native Americans were part of a well-conceived and orchestrated plan to run whites out of
the region” (167). This over exaggeration helped his decisive plan to get rid of the
Native Americans. Evans has the power to make these decisions. He uses this power to
rapidly execute anti-native measures. Evans was unnecessarily strict on the Native
Americans, “Together the new governor and the preacher turned military-leader would hold
the reins of power in the territory, never relaxing their grip until the question of who
owned the land, whites or Native Americans, had been decisively resolved.” Evans new the
weaknesses of the Native Americans and how to best use those weaknesses to accomplish his
anti-native goals. Evans strategically placed the natives in the most vulnerable positions
for them, "'Indians near the camps,' Evans stated, 'are difficult for the agents to
control" (174).  This dialog is showing how Evan's goal is control. Since Evans is in
charge of the agents this makes him almost directly in control of the Native Americans.
Evan's trait of decisiveness made sure that the natives had no net of protection form the
United States government. Evans got minimal repercussions for the countless things he did
against the natives.

   Another trait in John Evans that I noted was his irrationality. Based on the accounts
of many people in Coel's book he was considered "hot headed", “As the historian Grinnell
put it, the governor, when his attempt to remove the Native Americans from the land by
legal means failed, lost his head and resolved to remove them by possible” (174).  This
shows how Evan's lack of control combined with his power led to actions from the United
States government that were often made out of impulse and were easily executed due to his
position of high power. Evans has described his anger towards Native Americans before,
"The idea that this country belonged to [the Native Americans] gets its most ridiculous
aspect from the proposition that a country a thousand miles long and five hundred miles
wide, one of the most fertile in the world, should belong to a few bands of roving Native
Americans, nomadic tribes, in fee as their own property" (160). This description shows how
often his anger (which led to his irrationality) was fueled by his patriotism. A sense of
pride for your country can often lead too far. I believe that most of his life was fueled
by patriotism saying that he ran for positions in the United States government.  With his
irrationality it seemed that ever order or statement he made was a desperate attempt to
get rid of the Natives. Since forcefully removing or massacring the Natives would be very
illegal Evans got very angry at the fact that he could not use his power to easily remove
them and get them out of his sight and out of any white interference. "As the historian
Grinnell put it the governor, when his attempt to remove the Indians from the land by
legal means failed, lost his head and resolved to remove them by any means possible."
(174). Many people at the time considered the natives as "savages" which I would consider
being someone who is mindlessly violent. When Evans was angry or "hot headed" I think he
could be considered at a savage. He seemed to loose all sense of reality when he thought
about the natives. Evans changed over time by eventually giving up on legal means and
resorting to giving orders whenever he felt like it. Evans characteristic of irrationality
had a significant effect on the Native Americans throughout his time as governor of
Colorado.

    The third trait that Evans exbibits is power. Unfortunately when the public puts
someone in a high position of power they do have quite a bit of power during their time in
office. The power that Evans and Chivington wielded was the main contributor to the Sand
Creek Massacre, the biggest landmark event in the feud between the US Government and the
Natives. Evans and Chivington were both power stricken and refused to see anything other
than an anti-native view. Even leading up to the massacre both made statements that showed
just how blind they were. Chivington stated that, "The Cheyennes will have to be soundly
whipped before they will be quiet. If any of them are caught in your vicinity, kill them,
as that is the only way" (184). This was a message from Chivington to Wynkoop the year of
the massacre. It shows how Chivington willingly used his power to make Wynkoop completely
anti-native. This was how much power Evans had. Another example of power being used to
push anti-native views was Evan's letter to Curtis in the same year as Sand Creek. Evan's
said, "We are at war with a powerful combination of Indian tribes pledged to sustain each
other and drive white people from the country." (186). John Evans played a significant
role in making Chivington as anti-native as he was. Evans maintained a rash policy of
having many military outposts immediately see Native Americans as hostile whenever
approached by them. Many guards at these outposts shot natives on sight which was almost
all because of Evan's influence. Both Evans and Chivington loved to spew anti-native
orders around to everyone else with power in the United States. Because of their power
this led to many forced anti-native views within the soldiers and other people in the
community that interacted with natives. Evans changed significantly for the worse near the
end of 1864. All his bad traits got worse which was the main cause that led to the
massacre happening, it was under his power. His final demise for all the bad decisions he
made leading up to massacre was the investigation into Evans in 1865 and his resignation
later that year.

    I have learned through Coel's characterization about the significant effects that
power can have on a person. John Evans was placed in a position of great power and Coel's
writing showed me what a crazy difference Evans made. I think that Evans experienced vast
support from the white population that put him in office. He was expressing the views of
the people which, at the time, were very very anti Native American. I think that Evans was
allowed to continue pushing his agenda because other people in power thought he was doing
the "dirty work". Despite Evans actually making the order I saw in Coel's book that any
white population was very against Native Americans. Coel's views impacted my view of the
world by me looking at how much power certain political officials hold. No quite in Evans
case but many political officials will act with what the people who voted them in voted
for. Evans was a very powerful political force.
hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh
